DATASET_CARD.md, before:

# Dataset Card: Adversarial Plate Overlay Dataset

## Purpose
This dataset generator is designed for **research into adversarial robustness** of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) models.  
The goal is **not to conceal license plates in real-world use**, but to provide controlled, reproducible data for studying:
- Model brittleness under adversarial overlays.
- How adversarial training affects generalization.
- Privacy-preserving methods for resisting surveillance capitalism and corporate misuse.

## NOT for:
- Evading law enforcement.
- Facilitating illegal activity.
- Deployment in production systems without ethical review.

## Composition
- **Inputs:** Background vehicle images, plate overlays (cropped PNGs).
- **Outputs:** Composite images with adversarial perturbations + JSON metadata.

## Use Cases
- Benchmarking ALPR/OCR adversarial robustness.
- Training defense models against adversarial perturbations.
- Privacy/ethics research on surveillance systems.

## Risks & Limitations
- Generated examples are synthetic and may not reflect real-world conditions.
- Misuse is possible if applied outside research contexts.

## License
Released for academic and research use under MIT, subject to responsible disclosure and ethical use.

Commit message:

Fix final CLI issues and update documentation
✅ Fixed Issues:
- Remove unused click import since using static help text
- Confirm examples() command is properly decorated and working

📚 Documentation Updates:
- README.md: Added CLI reference section with all new options (--seed, --as, examples)
- project_spec.md: Updated CLI commands and options documentation
- DATASET_CARD.md: Enhanced reproducibility section with --seed examples
- Added scope parameter documentation for perturbations

🧪 Verification:
- All 35 tests passing
- examples command working correctly
- Region/global scope functionality documented
- CLI help-on-error behavior confirmed

The implementation now fully addresses all review feedback with:
- Contextual help on every error
- Region-scoped perturbations by default
- Enhanced CLI UX with --seed, --as=yaml, examples command
- Comprehensive documentation updates
- Clean code without unused imports

DATASET_CARD.md, after:

# Dataset Card: Adversarial Plate Overlay Dataset

## Reproducibility

The dataset generation process is deterministic when using the same:
- Random seed (`random_seed` in config or `--seed` CLI option)
- Input images (backgrounds and overlays)
- Perturbation parameters
- Software version

### Reproducible Generation

```bash
# Generate identical datasets with same seed
advplate generate --seed 42 --config my_config.yaml

# Or specify in config file
# dataset:
#   random_seed: 42
```

All perturbations respect the random seed for consistent results across runs.

## Purpose
This dataset generator is designed for **research into adversarial robustness** of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) models.  
The goal is **not to conceal license plates in real-world use**, but to provide controlled, reproducible data for studying:
- Model brittleness under adversarial overlays.
- How adversarial training affects generalization.
- Privacy-preserving methods for resisting surveillance capitalism and corporate misuse.

## NOT for:
- Evading law enforcement.
- Facilitating illegal activity.
- Deployment in production systems without ethical review.

## Composition
- **Inputs:** Background vehicle images, plate overlays (cropped PNGs).
- **Outputs:** Composite images with adversarial perturbations + JSON metadata.

## Use Cases
- Benchmarking ALPR/OCR adversarial robustness.
- Training defense models against adversarial perturbations.
- Privacy/ethics research on surveillance systems.

## Risks & Limitations
- Generated examples are synthetic and may not reflect real-world conditions.
- Misuse is possible if applied outside research contexts.

## License
Released for academic and research use under MIT, subject to responsible disclosure and ethical use.
