README.md, before:

# 📜 PlateShapez

A research tool for generating adversarially perturbed license plate overlays on vehicle images, producing structured datasets with reproducibility, transparency, and ethical guardrails.

**Design Principle:** *user-first, safe by default, hackable by experts*.

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 🎬 Try the Demo First!

For a complete walkthrough that creates test images and demonstrates both CLI and Python API:

```bash
# Run the integrated CLI demo (recommended)
uv run advplate demo

# With automatic cleanup
uv run advplate demo --cleanup

# Or run the demo script directly
uv run python examples/demo_full_workflow.py
```

This demo will:
- Create synthetic car backgrounds and license plate overlays
- Show CLI usage with custom configurations
- Demonstrate Python API with different perturbations
- Generate datasets and show output structure
- Display metadata and results analysis

### Prerequisites

- **uv** (Python package manager) installed:
  ```bash
  curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
  ```

### Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/benjordan/plateshapez.git
cd plateshapez

# Install dependencies
uv sync --group dev

# Install the CLI tool
uv pip install -e .
```

### Basic Usage

1. **Prepare your data:**
   ```
   project/
   ├── backgrounds/     # Vehicle images (JPG)
   ├── overlays/        # License plate images (PNG with alpha)
   └── config.yaml      # Optional configuration
   ```

2. **Generate dataset:**
   ```bash
   # Generate dataset with defaults
   uv run advplate generate

   # Generate with custom config and seed for reproducibility
   uv run advplate generate --config my_config.yaml --seed 42

   # Preview generation plan
   uv run advplate generate --dry-run
   ```

3. **Explore available options:**
   ```bash
   # Run interactive demo
   uv run advplate demo
   
   # List available perturbations
   uv run advplate list

   # Show current configuration
   uv run advplate info --as yaml

   # Print example configuration
   uv run advplate examples

   # Show version
   uv run advplate version
   ```

### Python API

```python
from plateshapez import DatasetGenerator

# Generate dataset programmatically
gen = DatasetGenerator(
    bg_dir="backgrounds",
    overlay_dir="overlays",
    out_dir="dataset",
    perturbations=[
        {"name": "shapes", "params": {"num_shapes": 20}},
        {"name": "noise", "params": {"intensity": 25}},
        {"name": "texture", "params": {"type": "grain", "intensity": 0.3}}
    ],
    random_seed=1337,
    verbose=True  # Enable verbose output
)
gen.run(n_variants=10)
```

## 🎛️ Configuration

### Configuration File (config.yaml)

```yaml
dataset:
  backgrounds: "./backgrounds"
  overlays: "./overlays"
  output: "./dataset"
  n_variants: 10
  random_seed: 1337

perturbations:
  - name: shapes
    params:
      num_shapes: 20
      min_size: 2
      max_size: 15
  - name: noise
    params:
      intensity: 25
  - name: texture
    params:
      type: grain
      intensity: 0.3
  - name: warp
    params:
      intensity: 5.0
      frequency: 20.0

logging:
  level: INFO
  save_metadata: true
```

### Available Perturbations

- **shapes**: Random rectangles, ellipses, triangles (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **noise**: Add Gaussian noise (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **warp**: Mild geometric warping (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **texture**: Overlay texture maps (grain, scratches, dirt)

**Scope Parameter**: All perturbations support a `scope` parameter:
- `scope: region` (default): Apply only to the license plate area
- `scope: global`: Apply to the entire image

### CLI Reference

**Generation Commands:**
- `uv run advplate generate` - Generate dataset with defaults
- `uv run advplate generate --config file.yaml --seed 42` - Generate with config and seed
- `uv run advplate generate --dry-run` - Preview without creating files

**Demo & Information Commands:**
- `uv run advplate demo` - Run interactive demo with synthetic images
- `uv run advplate demo --cleanup` - Run demo with automatic cleanup
- `uv run advplate list` - List available perturbations
- `uv run advplate info` - Show current configuration (JSON)
- `uv run advplate info --as yaml` - Show configuration in YAML format
- `uv run advplate examples` - Print example configuration
- `uv run advplate version` - Show version

**CLI Options:**
- `--config PATH` - Path to YAML/JSON configuration file
- `--n_variants INT` - Override number of variants per image pair
- `--seed INT` - Random seed for reproducible results
- `--verbose` - Enable verbose logging
- `--debug` - Enable debug logging with full stack traces
- `--dry-run` - Preview generation plan without creating files

## 📁 Output Structure

Generated datasets follow this structure:

```
dataset/
├── images/              # Generated composite images
│   ├── car1_plate1_000.png
│   ├── car1_plate1_001.png
│   └── ...
└── labels/              # Metadata JSON files
    ├── car1_plate1_000.json
    ├── car1_plate1_001.json
    └── ...
```

Each JSON file contains:
- Background and overlay filenames
- Overlay position and size
- Applied perturbations with parameters
- Random seed for reproducibility
- Variant index for tracking multiple versions

## 🔧 Development (npm-like commands)

You can use either the console script (after `uv sync`) or the Bash wrapper.

- Console script (requires one-time `uv sync`):
  ```bash
  # Format / Lint / Type-check / All checks
  uv run dev format
  uv run dev lint
  uv run dev type
  uv run dev check

  # Pre-commit hooks
  uv run dev hooks install   # installs pre-commit & pre-push hooks
  uv run dev pre-commit      # run hooks on all files
  
  # Cleanup commands
  uv run dev cleanup         # standard cleanup (demo files and datasets)
  uv run dev cleanup all     # full cleanup (includes .venv and build artifacts)
  ```

- Bash wrapper (works without installing the package):
  ```bash
  ./scripts/dev format
  ./scripts/dev lint
  ./scripts/dev type
  ./scripts/dev check
  ./scripts/dev hooks install
  ./scripts/dev pre-commit
  ```

These map to the same underlying tools and are aligned with CI and `scripts/check.sh`.

## What the commands do

- `format`: `ruff format .`
- `lint`: `ruff check . --fix`
- `type`: `mypy .`
- `check`: runs format, lint, and type in sequence (same as `scripts/check.sh`)
- `hooks install`: `pre-commit install --hook-type pre-commit --hook-type pre-push`
- `pre-commit`: `pre-commit run --all-files`
- `cleanup`: reset project to fresh state (removes demo files and datasets)
- `cleanup all`: full cleanup including .venv and build artifacts

## 📚 Additional Documentation

- **[Project Specification](docs/project_spec.md)** - Detailed technical requirements and implementation notes
- **[Usage Examples](docs/usage_examples.md)** - Comprehensive examples for CLI and Python API
- **[Dataset Card](DATASET_CARD.md)** - Ethical guidelines and responsible use information
- **[Code Examples](examples/)** - Working Python scripts demonstrating API usage
  - `demo_full_workflow.py` - Complete end-to-end demo with synthetic images
  - `generate_defaults.py` - Basic API usage examples

## 🔬 Research & Ethics

This tool is designed for **research into adversarial robustness** of OCR and ALPR systems. Please review the [Dataset Card](DATASET_CARD.md) for ethical guidelines and responsible use practices.

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:
```bash
# Run all tests
uv run pytest

# Run with coverage
uv run pytest --cov=plateshapez

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/test_pipeline.py
```

### Reset to Fresh State

To clean up all generated files and reset for fresh testing:

```bash
# Using dev command (recommended)
uv run dev cleanup         # standard cleanup
uv run dev cleanup all     # full cleanup

# Direct script usage
python scripts/cleanup.py
python scripts/cleanup.py --all
python scripts/cleanup.py --dry-run  # preview mode
```

## CI

GitHub Actions runs the same checks via `./scripts/check.sh`. Local pre-commit hooks use the same tools via uv to avoid version drift.

Commit message:

Updated readme to properly create a virutal environment using uv

README.md, after:

# 📜 PlateShapez

A research tool for generating adversarially perturbed license plate overlays on vehicle images, producing structured datasets with reproducibility, transparency, and ethical guardrails.

**Design Principle:** *user-first, safe by default, hackable by experts*.

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 🎬 Try the Demo First!

For a complete walkthrough that creates test images and demonstrates both CLI and Python API:

```bash
# Run the integrated CLI demo (recommended)
uv run advplate demo

# With automatic cleanup
uv run advplate demo --cleanup

# Or run the demo script directly
uv run python examples/demo_full_workflow.py
```

This demo will:
- Create synthetic car backgrounds and license plate overlays
- Show CLI usage with custom configurations
- Demonstrate Python API with different perturbations
- Generate datasets and show output structure
- Display metadata and results analysis

### Prerequisites

- **uv** (Python package manager) installed:
  ```bash
  # Install uv
  curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
  ```

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/benjordan/plateshapez.git
cd plateshapez

# Create virtual environment and activate
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
uv sync
# or uv sync --group dev for development dependencies

# Install the CLI tool
uv pip install -e .
```

### Basic Usage

1. **Prepare your data:**
   ```
   project/
   ├── backgrounds/     # Vehicle images (JPG)
   ├── overlays/        # License plate images (PNG with alpha)
   └── config.yaml      # Optional configuration
   ```

2. **Generate dataset:**
   ```bash
   # Generate dataset with defaults
   uv run advplate generate

   # Generate with custom config and seed for reproducibility
   uv run advplate generate --config my_config.yaml --seed 42

   # Preview generation plan
   uv run advplate generate --dry-run
   ```

3. **Explore available options:**
   ```bash
   # Run interactive demo
   uv run advplate demo
   
   # List available perturbations
   uv run advplate list

   # Show current configuration
   uv run advplate info --as yaml

   # Print example configuration
   uv run advplate examples

   # Show version
   uv run advplate version
   ```

### Python API

```python
from plateshapez import DatasetGenerator

# Generate dataset programmatically
gen = DatasetGenerator(
    bg_dir="backgrounds",
    overlay_dir="overlays",
    out_dir="dataset",
    perturbations=[
        {"name": "shapes", "params": {"num_shapes": 20}},
        {"name": "noise", "params": {"intensity": 25}},
        {"name": "texture", "params": {"type": "grain", "intensity": 0.3}}
    ],
    random_seed=1337,
    verbose=True  # Enable verbose output
)
gen.run(n_variants=10)
```

## 🎛️ Configuration

### Configuration File (config.yaml)

```yaml
dataset:
  backgrounds: "./backgrounds"
  overlays: "./overlays"
  output: "./dataset"
  n_variants: 10
  random_seed: 1337

perturbations:
  - name: shapes
    params:
      num_shapes: 20
      min_size: 2
      max_size: 15
  - name: noise
    params:
      intensity: 25
  - name: texture
    params:
      type: grain
      intensity: 0.3
  - name: warp
    params:
      intensity: 5.0
      frequency: 20.0

logging:
  level: INFO
  save_metadata: true
```

### Available Perturbations

- **shapes**: Random rectangles, ellipses, triangles (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **noise**: Add Gaussian noise (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **warp**: Mild geometric warping (supports `scope: region|global`)
- **texture**: Overlay texture maps (grain, scratches, dirt)

**Scope Parameter**: All perturbations support a `scope` parameter:
- `scope: region` (default): Apply only to the license plate area
- `scope: global`: Apply to the entire image

### CLI Reference

**Generation Commands:**
- `uv run advplate generate` - Generate dataset with defaults
- `uv run advplate generate --config file.yaml --seed 42` - Generate with config and seed
- `uv run advplate generate --dry-run` - Preview without creating files

**Demo & Information Commands:**
- `uv run advplate demo` - Run interactive demo with synthetic images
- `uv run advplate demo --cleanup` - Run demo with automatic cleanup
- `uv run advplate list` - List available perturbations
- `uv run advplate info` - Show current configuration (JSON)
- `uv run advplate info --as yaml` - Show configuration in YAML format
- `uv run advplate examples` - Print example configuration
- `uv run advplate version` - Show version

**CLI Options:**
- `--config PATH` - Path to YAML/JSON configuration file
- `--n_variants INT` - Override number of variants per image pair
- `--seed INT` - Random seed for reproducible results
- `--verbose` - Enable verbose logging
- `--debug` - Enable debug logging with full stack traces
- `--dry-run` - Preview generation plan without creating files

## 📁 Output Structure

Generated datasets follow this structure:

```
dataset/
├── images/              # Generated composite images
│   ├── car1_plate1_000.png
│   ├── car1_plate1_001.png
│   └── ...
└── labels/              # Metadata JSON files
    ├── car1_plate1_000.json
    ├── car1_plate1_001.json
    └── ...
```

Each JSON file contains:
- Background and overlay filenames
- Overlay position and size
- Applied perturbations with parameters
- Random seed for reproducibility
- Variant index for tracking multiple versions

## 🔧 Development (npm-like commands)

You can use either the console script (after `uv sync`) or the Bash wrapper.

- Console script (requires one-time `uv sync`):
  ```bash
  # Format / Lint / Type-check / All checks
  uv run dev format
  uv run dev lint
  uv run dev type
  uv run dev check

  # Pre-commit hooks
  uv run dev hooks install   # installs pre-commit & pre-push hooks
  uv run dev pre-commit      # run hooks on all files
  
  # Cleanup commands
  uv run dev cleanup         # standard cleanup (demo files and datasets)
  uv run dev cleanup all     # full cleanup (includes .venv and build artifacts)
  ```

- Bash wrapper (works without installing the package):
  ```bash
  ./scripts/dev format
  ./scripts/dev lint
  ./scripts/dev type
  ./scripts/dev check
  ./scripts/dev hooks install
  ./scripts/dev pre-commit
  ```

These map to the same underlying tools and are aligned with CI and `scripts/check.sh`.

## What the commands do

- `format`: `ruff format .`
- `lint`: `ruff check . --fix`
- `type`: `mypy .`
- `check`: runs format, lint, and type in sequence (same as `scripts/check.sh`)
- `hooks install`: `pre-commit install --hook-type pre-commit --hook-type pre-push`
- `pre-commit`: `pre-commit run --all-files`
- `cleanup`: reset project to fresh state (removes demo files and datasets)
- `cleanup all`: full cleanup including .venv and build artifacts

## 📚 Additional Documentation

- **[Project Specification](docs/project_spec.md)** - Detailed technical requirements and implementation notes
- **[Usage Examples](docs/usage_examples.md)** - Comprehensive examples for CLI and Python API
- **[Dataset Card](DATASET_CARD.md)** - Ethical guidelines and responsible use information
- **[Code Examples](examples/)** - Working Python scripts demonstrating API usage
  - `demo_full_workflow.py` - Complete end-to-end demo with synthetic images
  - `generate_defaults.py` - Basic API usage examples

## 🔬 Research & Ethics

This tool is designed for **research into adversarial robustness** of OCR and ALPR systems. Please review the [Dataset Card](DATASET_CARD.md) for ethical guidelines and responsible use practices.

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:
```bash
# Run all tests
uv run pytest

# Run with coverage
uv run pytest --cov=plateshapez

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/test_pipeline.py
```

### Reset to Fresh State

To clean up all generated files and reset for fresh testing:

```bash
# Using dev command (recommended)
uv run dev cleanup         # standard cleanup
uv run dev cleanup all     # full cleanup

# Direct script usage
python scripts/cleanup.py
python scripts/cleanup.py --all
python scripts/cleanup.py --dry-run  # preview mode
```

## CI

GitHub Actions runs the same checks via `./scripts/check.sh`. Local pre-commit hooks use the same tools via uv to avoid version drift.
